docs: restructure working PR (#4866)
dfinity/motoko: doc/md/fundamentals/1-basic-syntax/1-defining-an-actor.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

# Defining an actor

In Motoko, an actor is a unit of computation that encapsulates [state](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/state) and behavior. Unlike traditional functions or objects in other programming languages, actors operate independently and interact with each other through [asynchronous](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/actors-async#async--await) messaging.

> Actors are objects with special system-level capabilities. An actor supports asynchronous operations and can persist state across calls. Unlike modules, actors cannot be instantiated on their own using `actor()`. Each actor runs independently with its own message queue, allowing concurrent execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Actors are objects with special system-level capabilities. An actor supports asynchronous operations and can persist state across calls. Each actor runs independently with its own message queue, allowing concurrent execution.
```

A Motoko program typically starts by defining an actor.

```motoko
// Declares an actor named Main

> actor Main {

Reviewer 2: `persistent` actor?

Reviewer 3: Resolved

  // Defines a hello function that returns the message "Hello, world!"
  public query func hello() : async Text {
    "Hello, world!"
  };
};

// Actors in Motoko communicate asynchronously. await ensures the result is retrieved once the function completes.
await Main.hello();
```

> A Motoko actor always presents its interface as a suite of named [functions](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/basic-syntax/functions) (also called methods) with defined argument and return types. When Motoko code is compiled, this interface is automatically generated in **[Candid](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/interact-with-canisters/candid/candid-concepts)**, an interface description language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Motoko actor always presents its interface as a suite of named [functions](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/basic-syntax/functions) (also called methods) with defined argument and return types. When Motoko code is compiled, this interface is automatically translated to **[Candid](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/interact-with-canisters/candid/candid-concepts)**, an interface description language. The Candid description can be consumed by other canisters, written in Motoko or another language such as Rust.
```

Reviewer: Maybe display the candid here?

Reviewer 3: Noted

---
sidebar_position: 1
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

# Defining an actor

In Motoko, an actor is a unit of computation that encapsulates [state](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/state) and behavior. Unlike traditional functions or objects in other programming languages, actors operate independently and interact with each other through [asynchronous](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/actors-async#async--await) messaging.

Actors are objects with special system-level capabilities. An actor supports asynchronous operations and can persist state across calls. Unlike modules, actors cannot be instantiated on their own using `actor()`. Each actor runs independently with its own message queue, allowing concurrent execution.

A Motoko program typically starts by defining an actor.

```motoko
// Declares an actor named Main
actor Main {
  // Defines a hello function that returns the message "Hello, world!"
  public query func hello() : async Text {
    "Hello, world!"
  };
};

// Actors in Motoko communicate asynchronously. await ensures the result is retrieved once the function completes.
await Main.hello();
```

> A Motoko actor always presents its interface as a suite of named [functions](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/basic-syntax/functions) with defined argument and return types. When Motoko code is compiled, this interface is automatically generated in **[Candid](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/interact-with-canisters/candid/candid-concepts)**, an interface description language.

Author: @Demali-876

> A Motoko actor always presents its interface as a suite of named [functions](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/basic-syntax/functions) with defined argument and return types. When Motoko code is compiled, this interface is automatically generated in **[Candid](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/interact-with-canisters/candid/candid-concepts)**, an interface description language.

Reviewer 3: Resolve in #5062

---
sidebar_position: 1
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

# Defining an actor

In Motoko, an actor is a unit of computation that encapsulates [state](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/state) and behavior. Unlike traditional functions or objects in other programming languages, actors operate independently and interact with each other through [asynchronous](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/actors-async#async--await) messaging.

Actors are objects with special system-level capabilities. An actor supports asynchronous operations and can persist state across calls. Each actor runs independently with its own message queue, allowing concurrent execution.  

A Motoko program typically starts by defining an actor.

> ```motoko

Reviewer: Tbh, although boring, I think the counter is actually a better example since it has some state. Then you can add an increment update method and a read() query method. This illustrated encapuslation too as the counter value can only increase by calling inc(), never decrease, and the count is only accessible via inc() and read() and cannot be modified otherwise.
